## **RNP 002: Layer 1 Network Expansion**
---
|RNP # |Title  |Category | Author |Created | Status
|------|-------|---------|--------|--| -- | 
|002   |Layer 1 Network Expansion |Core-Technical|Ryan Shea|03-20-2023 | Approved and on the Roadmap | 
---

### **Overview**

After a successful [[vote on
RNP001]](https://github.com/rndr-network/RNPs/blob/main/Approved%20and%20on%20the%20Roadmap/rnp-001-bme.md)
introducing a Burn and Mint Equilibrium (BME) model, it is proposed that
the Render Foundation invests resources to build this on the Solana
blockchain.

In anticipation of future network growth, there exists a need for a high
throughput, low latency blockchain for network settlement and node
operation. Blockchains were evaluated with the following criteria:
developer community, throughput, liquidity, transaction fees,
programming languages, integrating smart contracts, speed of
implementation and the maturity of the project. After an exhaustive
review---including input from the community---it is proposed that Solana
is the best option for the future of the Render Foundation and that the
BME model be implemented on Solana.

### **Category**

This is a core proposal within the technical subcategory.

### **Motivation**

The key advantage of the switch to a new L1 is to help scale the network
to meet the demand of our technical needs and implement the BME.

### **Stakeholders**

This proposal impacts all members of the Render Network community.

### **Implementation**

**Researching options, community input**

The [community sentiment polling](#appendix) provided a
number of layer one networks to review. The results showed strong
support for Solana, then followed by our current platform, Polygon.

Given the Render Network is a mature project with millions of frames
processed annually, it was not a surprise that these options were
preferred over some of the newer layer ones and scalability solutions
that have not yet proven scale, stress under load, on- and off-chain
liquidity, or would require significant technical investment from the
Render Foundation.

The decision whether to continue with Polygon versus moving to Solana
sparked a spirited debate between the pros and cons of each, with
support for Solana's runtime, developer community, low transaction fees,
and speed contrasting Polygon's centralization, reorg tendency, and user
experience concerns.

These are outlined further below.

### **Programming language, throughput, and smart contract integration** 

The Render Network has been built with a goal towards providing
real-time, rendered, interactive holographic streams. This will require
states to be updated dynamically, in real-time and on-chain.

To do so, the network needs to be able to write high-performance code
both on-chain and on GPUs. Rust can provide the Render Network greater
speed and flexibility than Solidity, ultimately permitting the use of
the same code for GPU render work and smart contracts. Further, the
Solana virtual machine can process both C++ or Rust code and turn that
into a smart contract.

It is also important to note that once real-time, rendered, interactive
holographic streams are being streamed on the network and on-chain,
transaction costs will start to play an important role. Solana's
blockchain has both higher transaction throughput and lower transaction
fees than Polygon.\
\
ETH runs at roughly 14 TPS as you can see in this [live
TPS](https://blockchair.com/ethereum/charts/transactions-per-second).
Polygon averages just more than double, with roughly [29
TPS](https://polygonscan.com/), as you can see in this
[live TPS here](https://dune.com/queries/1390025/2362801).
Finally Solana currently averages over 140 times that of Polygon, with
roughly 4,080 TPS -- here's a [link to live Solana
TPS](https://explorer.solana.com/). Both Polygon and Solana
claim they are built to achieve over 50,000 TPS in the long term.

Moving forward, the Render Network would like to include more data
on-chain for both current and future offerings, providing greater
transparency for token holders and node operators alongside greater
utility for artists. However, major EVM-based chains do not have the
transactions per second (TPS) required as the project continues to
scale. At peak moments, the Render Network could already have more
frames completed within a single second than ETH's TPS, and as we look
toward 10x or 100x growth along with more data written to the blockchain
itself, it becomes problematic without further obfuscating the processes
& information stored on-chain.

Even for existing use-cases, certain network designs are not scalable
due to transaction fees. For example, a 200 frame render job running on
a network where data is written to the chain and payment sent to node
operators as each frame completes would require 200 transactions. ETH
gas fees trend [around an average of \$0.70 per
tx](https://ycharts.com/indicators/ethereum_average_transaction_fee).
On ETH mainnet, this would cost \$140 in fees at the current gas rate.
Polygon gas fees trend around \$0.025 per tx (this one is a bit more of
a rough calculation - the [daily tx count can be found
here](https://polygonscan.com/chart/tx) and the [daily
total network fees
here](https://polygonscan.com/chart/transactionfee)). On
Polygon, this would cost \$5 in fees at the current rate, while on
Solana it would cost under \$0.001, a reduction of roughly 5000 times
over Polygon. Further these same 200 transactions could cost as little
as \$0.00026 on Solana (19,000 less) if priority fees were not needed.

While \$5 in gas fees may sound reasonable as many have been
desensitized by higher prices, the Render Network is a utility where the
cost of compute power used on the job could be significantly less than
those fees, effectively meaning transaction fees have the ability to
raise the price of compute work exponentially. In practice, adding that
amount of write volume to an EVM chain would also inflate gas prices
further and likely exceed those estimates while hindering user
experience. As additional use-cases become available, such as
holographic streaming, even moderate transaction fees could limit
creators' ability to innovate.

Certain applications of NFT technology - token gated ticketing of large
scale streaming experiences, massively online realtime gaming programs,
social media microtransaction based media, or micro asset economies for
example - require minting of significant amounts of data to be encoded
on the blockchain that go well beyond simple the basic tokenization of
completed frames, which number in the millions. For example, a single
render can include thousands of unique assets as individual nodes within
its scene graph - including 3D models, textures, scripts, HDRIs,
effects, custom render graph nodes, volumes, rays , sdf / meshes, and
scene graph states. Many applications of the Render Network for
real-time streaming experiences, gaming, generative art, and emergent
forms of composable media require all of these unique node graph assets
to be tracked on chain. Such a system requires multiple orders of
magnitude TPS increases when compared to the TPS requirements for
processing rendered frames.

On-chain transaction frameworks are expensive for these emerging
applications that network participants are requesting to access via the
Render SDK. Not only does Solana offer significant increases in TPS
throughput when compared to other L1's but [emerging Merkle Tree
compression for NFTs developed by Solana Labs and
Metaplex](https://www.metaplex.com/posts/expanding-digital-assets-with-compression-for-nfts)
enable exponential increases in the ability to tokenize node graph
assets for next generation blockchain applications based on the Render
Scene Graph. Because Merkle Tree compression enables more data to be put
on chain in an atomic format at orders of magnitude higher volumes than
what is currently available, the network can tokenize entire scene
graphs in addition to completed frames, opening up a new economy of 3D
applications for network users. For example, each NFT based on a render
frame or animation could be atomically decomposed into smaller NFTs that
assemble a node graph where one can explore each individual piece and
item that shares a parent / child. New forms of composability would then
be possible where one could jump from \"NFT -\> assets -\> other NFTs
using that asset\" to find out how influential an NFT is based on how
many others use its original assets or explore asset / NFT relationships
for whatever reason you may have - whether royalty flows, creative
remixing, AI and semantic intelligence. These additional feature sets
open up a host of applications that Render Network users are building,
including dynamic virtual asset collections, remixable or composable
NFTs, and immutable expanding large scale public NFT archives.

### **Developer community and speed of implementation**

Historically the Render Network has struggled to attract and retain top
Solidity developers. In a [Dec 2022 Stack Overflow
Survey](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/), Rust was
listed as over 5X more popular than Solidity.

There has been a recent emergence of protocols which incentivize people
to do verifiable work similar to the verifiable GPU compute work
performed on the Render Network. Solana has attracted a higher share of
such projects including Helium, Hivemapper, and Audius.

Helium's April 2023 migration to Solana will provide important assurance
that such a move is possible, and will be the first live implementation
of the BME on any blockchain (besides Helium's proprietary chain from
which they are moving away). Much of Helium's Solana BME project is open
sourced and could be leveraged to significantly speed up the Render
Network's implementation if Solana is selected.

### **Security**

On any major blockchain, the most common attack vector is the smart
contract itself, and in that regard a project is vulnerable on any
blockchain. When discussing the possibility of a hack, the robustness of
the programming language and the skill of the developer are the primary
factors to consider, and Rust excels as a programming language. When
combined with the deep talent pool of experienced Rust developers, a
contract on Solana is not going to be more vulnerable than a contract on
any other network.

The "Nakamoto coefficient" is a metric coined by Balaji Srinivasan and
named after Bitcoin's creator, and is defined as the smallest number of
validators who cumulatively stake 33% of the network's staked tokens. In
theory, depending on the network's consensus mechanism, a collusion of
these validators would be able to censor the network's transactions or
halt it altogether. Thus, a higher Nakamoto coefficient represents a
higher distribution of staked tokens, and a higher degree of
decentralization. Solana's [July 2022 validator health
report](https://solana.com/news/validator-health-report-august-2022)
listed Solana's Nakamoto coefficient at 31, over 10 times Polygon's. In
addition, a June 2022 [Cointelegraph
report](https://cointelegraph.com/news/solana-said-to-be-more-decentralized-than-people-think-but-there-s-more)
listed Solana's active validators at 1,875, over 19 times the 98
validators on Polygon.

### **Liquidity and uptime**

Ethereum trumps Solana with respect to maturity, and as a result
security and liquidity. That being said, both SPL and Matic tokens are
listed on all current major CEX's that list RNDR.

RNP001 provides the ability for emissions to be allocated as rewards for
Liquidity Providers who participate in decentralized liquidity pools
which enable the automated purchase of RNDR via smart contract by
creators, which should further assist with liquidity.

All the major chains have gone through growing pains (see [2016 ETH
hard fork after the DAO
hack](https://www.gemini.com/en-US/cryptopedia/the-dao-hack-makerdao#section-the-dao-hack)
& the [2013 Bitcoin
rollback](https://news.bitcoin.com/bitcoins-software-has-been-rolled-back-before/)),
and Solana has not been immune, with a [string of outages in
2022](https://cointelegraph.com/news/network-outages-have-been-solana-s-curse-says-co-founder).
While Solana's uptime has improved since becoming a 2022 focus, it is
not yet at enterprise level, and a lot is expected from
[Firedancer](https://decrypt.co/111486/solana-co-founder-long-term-fix-network-outages)
to allow them to achieve this.

While different from downtime, [ETH often has 150k+ pending
transactions](https://etherscan.io/chart/pendingtx) --
users can spend more gas to get ahead, but someone who submitted a
transaction with underpriced gas could experience significant delays and
resulting in a user experience similar to that of downtime. Higher gas
fees will also not enable the Render Network's real-time streaming
goals.

In order to achieve its real-time streaming objectives, the Render
Network will need its blockchain to maintain an enterprise level uptime
not available on either Polygon or Solana today.

To mitigate, the BME model should initially be implemented without
real-time dependencies, until such time as both uptime and low cost
throughput are more established. To do so, the smart contract would be
constructed to remove any on-chain dependencies by moving the timing of
any decentralized RNDR purchase and burn process to after the job
performance and approval, and allowing for it to be batched should the
blockchain experience any downtime.

Further, Emissions would be minted in blocks in advance of distribution.
The Render Network already runs RNDR payments to Node Operators in a way
that can be done asynchronously, and that off-chain record keeping
should be carried over to future changes as well.

### **Migration** 

This proposal has focused on the question whether the new BME model
should be implemented on a different blockchain. Should the community
agree on the proposed implementation on Solana, consideration should be
applied on whether or not a full migration of existing Polygon tokens is
required. If not, being multi chain has significant benefits with
respect to liquidity.

Regardless, a smart contract update will be needed to facilitate. This
should be a topic for future RNPs.

### **Other Considerations**

Transferring the primary smart contract may come with unforeseen
effects, similar to the previous expansion onto Layer 2 Polygon ("L2").

In addition, the transference of chains may make the current L2 solution
either obsolete and/or incompatible with the smart contract, therefore
requiring additional considerations for the change of L2 solutions, such
as an update to the existing smart contract. As noted previously, this
should be a topic for future RNPs.

## **Appendix**

The Community Sentiment Polling results showed strong support for Solana
followed by Polygon.

![](RNP-002/image1.png)

Projections of cost savings from Merkle Tree NFT compression technology

![](RNP-002/image2.png)

