## **RNP 001: Burn-and-mint Equilibrium**


| RNP # |           Title           |    Category    |      Author     |   Created  | Status | 
|:-----:|:-------------------------:|:--------------:|:---------------:|:----------:| :-----: |
| 001   | Burn-and-Mint Equilibrium | Core-Technical | Shayon Sengupta | 06-09-2022 | Approved and on the Roadmap |

### Overview

We propose that the usage of RNDR as the payment denomination between artists
and node operators continues. Instead, artists would burn the required amount of
RNDR in exchange for non-fungible work credits which are distributed to node
operators.

Independently of the amount of work that is processed, the network would mint
RNDR tokens (or allocate some portion of its treasury reserve) over some epoch.
These tokens would be distributed to node operators pro-rata work completed, and
potentially weighed against some reputation score. The number of tokens
generated would be variable, and we could dynamically adjust this value based on
which side of the marketplace needs to be scaled at any given time.

Note that this model is similar to Helium Network’s [Burn-and-Mint
equilibrium](https://www.helium.com/token) model.

### Category

This is a core proposal within the technical subcategory.

### Motivation

The key advantage of the burn-and-mint model over the payment token model is
twofold:

1. RNDR would be treated as commodity asset, further in line with the network’s
   long-term aim of establishing a standard for tokenized compute
2. RNDR would have the potential to become a deflationary asset, allowing for
   strong value accrual to the token in the circumstance of strong network
   utilization and growth

### Stakeholders

This proposal impacts all members of the Render Network community

### Implementation

The Render Network would switch to a burn-and-mint equilibrium model with capped
net emissions. Given that the Render Network is currently a two-sided
marketplace, this model would serve node operators, creators and in turn,
liquidity providers. Note that this burn-and-mint model has been widely used by
the Helium Network (HNT).

The Render Network burn-and-mint model would work as follows:

The network currently consists of two key stakeholders: **Creators** (or parties
with jobs-to-be-done) and **Node Operators** (or parties performing
jobs-to-be-done).

*Example: The job-to-be-done is “provide rendering power for creators” over the
Render Network. The requester is “creators looking to get their projects
rendered on the Render Network”. The fulfiller is the actual nodes processing
these jobs.*

The primary unit of exchange that intermediates value transfer across the
network is the **RNDR Token (RNDR)**, which would act as the proprietary payment
currency.

Each job-to-be-done would be priced in USD, and the requestor would burn an
equivalent dollar value of RNDR tokens to submit to the network. Once the
requestor burns the required amount of base token (RNDR), a set of
non-transferrable, non-fungible **Coupon Tokens** (Render Credits) would be
issued to requesters and allocated among fulfillers to keep record of jobs
completed on the network

1. Note that the amount of base token burned to access the underlying service
   would be denominated in USD, but the denomination of the tokens burnt would
   be the base token.
2. The intended effect of this is that the requestor would demonstrate on-chain
   that the fulfiller has completed the work for the money that was burned.
    
    *Example: A Render Network creator burns $5 worth of RNDR to produce 5
    Render Credits, which are non-fungible and non-transferrable*
    

Node operators would be compensated for completing jobs via base-asset issuance
incentives:

1. Independent of the base token burning and coupon token issuance process, the
   network would **mint a number of base tokens per epoch** (set by the network)
   and distribute them to fulfillers according to predefined rules.
    1. Node operators would therefore be compensated for performing work or
       providing value on the network in the base token asset. These rewards
       would generally be segmented into two buckets;
        1. Availability rewards and incentives: Incentives for showing that the
           fulfiller is available to complete work on the network
        2. Job-to-be-done completion rewards: Incentives for actually completing
           jobs-to-be-done submitted to the network
    2. Note that the number of base tokens minted in an epoch would not have to
       be static. It could be variable, as long as it is not a function of
       burned tokens (this would create a circular dependency, and ultimately
       defeat the purpose of the BME model)
        
        *Example:* 
        
        *Data transfer rewards (Job-to-be-done completion rewards): If 2% of
        RNDR burned during an epoch were in the name of Node Operator A as
        represented in the Render Credits log, then Node Operator A would
        receive 2% of newly minted RNDR allocated for data transfer rewards.*
        
        *Availability rewards: If the same node were to complete 5% of uptime
        challenges defined to assess the reliability of the node network, it
        would receive an additional 5% of newly minted RNDR allocated for
        availability rewards.*
        

A **net emissions** cap would be designed to ensure that once the supply cap for
the base token has been reached by the network, fulfillers are still able to
receive rewards for performing work on the network

1. On an epoch by epoch basis, net emissions would “recycle” (i.e. mint) some
   set of burned base tokens available for use in rewarding fulfillers when
   there are no longer enough provided through minting.
2. Net emissions allow rewards to exist in later years, while also not
   extinguishing deflationary pressure after the cap has been reached. However,
   they need to be capped at some percentage of current issuance to maintain the
   core burn and mint equilibrium.

Emission amount and distribution per epoch would be **adjusted as per the growth
requirements of the networ**k i.e. valued stakeholders at different stages could
receive greater shares of emissions.

If the system were running near equilibrium state, the fulfillers would always
be paid the appropriate amount. This model assumes that both consumers and
service providers never want to actually hold the proprietary payment currency.
Rather, this model assumes that service providers only want to hold general
purpose currencies.

Let’s assume there are no market speculators and that the network runs on
average at about a 10,000 RNDR token rate per month. With this model, the
network would be in equilibrium—meaning that the number of tokens in circulation
remains unchanged— if 10,000 tokens are burned per epoch.

If usage grows and 15,000 tokens are burned in an epoch, then total supply will
decrease, creating upwards price pressure. This upwards price pressure means
fewer tokens need to be burned to purchase the same amount of service from the
network, bringing the system back into equilibrium.

The same system works in reverse: If usage slows and more tokens are minted than
burned in a given month, supply increases, creating downward price pressure,
meaning more tokens have to be burned for the same amount of service, bringing
the system back to equilibrium.

### Technical Considerations:

Implementation of this new model would require a smart contract migration.

It would also require forming and incentivizing distributed liquidity pools to
allow for sufficient liquidity to facilitate automated RNDR purchase.

Here is how the Render Network burn-and-mint model could work for Creators,,
Node Operators and Liquidity Providers:

1. **Creators:** On an epoch basis, Creators will receive a percentage of their
   RNDR spent that epoch back in the form of RNDR token rewards. This could
   ideally incentivize further use of the network and reward power users by
   allowing for more creations to be rendered on the Render Network. Percentage
   returns could be as high as 100% of RNDR spent initially, and could gradually
   taper as time goes on.

2. **Node operators:** Node operators will be rewarded for performing work or
   providing value. These rewards could generally be segmented into two buckets:
    1. **Coupon Token Rewards:** Incentives for completing jobs submitted to the
       network
    2. **Availability Rewards:** Incentives for node operator liveness

3. **Liquidity Providers:**  Liquidity providers will be rewarded per epoch for
   contributing staked tokens to the liquidity pools on partnered exchanges,
   allowing for RNDR to be available for the new burn-and-mint equilibrium
   system. Liquidity providers could be rewarded with an additional percentage
   of tokens staked that epoch, as determined by the network.

### Drawbacks

With this proposal, the Network would need to create a balanced emissions
schedule with set parameters to ensure that emission quantities are flexible
enough to reward the three key stakeholders of the network (node operators,
artists, and liquidity providers) proportional to the value they contribute to
the growth of the network at any given time.

Emissions quantities would also need to be able to support rewards for new
stakeholders or future forms of activity on the network e.g. proof-of-render
up-time, content staking.

In addition, the Net Emissions cap will need to be established at some
percentage of current issuance to maintain the core burn and mint equilibrium.

Implementation of the BME will be a change to node operators and will have a
slight learning curve, however, the new model will greatly benefit all members
of the network as a whole once it is up and running.

## Appendix

RNP-001 relies on an emissions schedule in order to maintain a balance of
outflows to stakeholders within the system and activity driven token burn. In
the following sections, we outline an emissions schedule given the following
constraints:

Substantive Rewards for Network Stakeholders: In order for BME to operate as
intended, it is critical to ensure that the notional value of tokens emitted
matches the value contributed by node operators, artists, and liquidity
providers across the lifecycle of the network. For reference, rewards at launch
are roughly 5x the current payouts to node operators in RNDR terms.

Changing Network and Market Conditions: At different points in time, the value
contributed by each of the above stakeholders will vary given the growth goals
of the network. It is critical that the split of rewards across specified
stakeholders, or new stakeholders as they emerge in the functioning of the
network, remain tunable to ensure that value-add actors are compensated for
their work.

Perpetual Emissions: Under the Burn-and-Mint Equilibrium, outflows must continue
in some capacity indefinitely in order to reward network activity. The schedule
must be designed such that there is no end to emissions, while the net emissions
cap specified in RNP-001 can be used to augment outflows to stakeholders in case
standard emissions are insufficient. Over time, new sources of outflows in the
form of treasury reserve allocations or DAO contributions can be used to
supplement emissions.

With these constraints in mind, we propose the emissions schedule defined in
this [this
spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1vgNamfJsJeCOUnFGtrdBw7GJCtN25bXEIFOluJQAO64/edit#gid=365524340).

![https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/Zhgj2or0tiNu6MDrdC7lAp7yCB0SmFpnU_Yzm5mPz2ettzU1nClTEogrbrG-LMXOdbMux5h_0N-FxkFpDIf2jNTyjjbf-L5z7E2vcmxdGbIjpVvUSUTs8wUIv-AchYP3BsqSOmx0RSUzvcdk0y1wRfg](https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/Zhgj2or0tiNu6MDrdC7lAp7yCB0SmFpnU_Yzm5mPz2ettzU1nClTEogrbrG-LMXOdbMux5h_0N-FxkFpDIf2jNTyjjbf-L5z7E2vcmxdGbIjpVvUSUTs8wUIv-AchYP3BsqSOmx0RSUzvcdk0y1wRfg)



A few notes:

The specified schedule only defines a cap on the total circulating RNDR tokens,
and does not account for the substantial amount of burn that will occur as a
result of network activities. In practice, we expect the circulating supply of
tokens to be substantially lower than amounts in the total supply column. 

The schedule requires an increased supply of 107,374,182 (20% of total supply)
tokens in order to incentivize stakeholders in the network. The increase in
supply is released in small batches (never more than 10% in a given year) and
dilutes existing token holders in favor of new entrants into the network. We
strongly believe that this is necessary in order to reward value accretive
stakeholders, and the total network activity generated as a result will outweigh
any concerns around a fixed supply cap.


The emissions schedule is broken down into two periods: Launch (Years 1-5) and
Growth (Year 5 - Indefinite). The purpose of this is to design a front-loaded
rewards schedule in initial stages of the network in order to ensure that early
adopters are rewarded for their participation. In the growth stage, we define
gradually decreasing outflows as per the damping coefficient (proposed at
0.945).

Please note that the emissions schedule outlined is subject to forthcoming
governance procedures, and relies heavily on parameter tuning in order to reward
actors in later stages of the network. We believe that the protocols specified
in RNP-000 are sufficient to inform changes to the schedule. 



